---
layout: post
title: "Social Justice if Made of Empathy"
date: 2013-04-28 19:51
comments: true
categories: 
---
I was listening to an episode of [The Ruby Rogues](http://rubyrogues.com) with
[Ashe Dryden](http://twitter.com/ashedryden) as the guest called
[101](http://rubyrogues.com/#find_the_show_link). The title is a reference to
what social justice folks call "101 work", which is the sort of entry-level
explanatory teaching that it takes to get someone from something like "Isn't a
code event specifically for girls, sexist?" to, "That's not cool".

Anyway, I really liked the episode, and I recommend you go give it a listen,
especially if you're new or entirely unintroduced to the topic of social
justice. They talk a lot about feminism specifically, since there's been several
high profile events related to it this year so far, but they talk about
intersectionality, too (like what is is, if you don't already know).

In this post, I want to address one specific topic they talked about. One
sentence, in a way. As part of a discussion about calling people out on comments
that are exclusionary or otherwise inappropriate, Ashe was saying that simply
saying, "That's not cool" can have a powerful effect, sending the message that
that kind of thing isn't socially acceptable within the context it was said and
that most people will modify their future behavior accordingly.

As a follow-up to that, [Avdi Grimm](http://twitter.com/avdi) asked if there was
ever a time that you'd say something, someone would point out that it made them
uncomfortable (or whatever) and you apologized, but decided that whatever the
statement was, it was so much a part of who you are, that you knew you'd say it
again in the future. I'm paraphrasing, here, hence the lack of quotes. In
answer, they talked about a few things, but someone said something else and the
conversation kind of got distracted. However, I'd like to address it somewhat.

The flippant answer to the question is, "Of course." I mean--if I say something
like, "I really, *really* like wearing argyle socks," and you're like, "That
comment offends me," there's not a whole lot I can do for you. Assuming I don't
just think you're trolling me, I would probably apologize because I don't like
to make people feel bad, but... I seriously wear argyle socks every day. I love
that shit. I am likely to express that idea in the future.

But if we're talking more seriously, thinking of a comment that actually
addresses people in some way (instead of socks), I think the idea becomes really
interesting (I'll leave it as an exercise to the reader to come up with an
appropriately offensive remark). If you say something offensive or exclusionary,
I'm going to give you (and me) the benefit of the doubt an assume it's because
you didn't realize it would be so. You're a good person; you don't enjoy ruining
other people's days.

After making your comment, someone in the group (or near the group over-hearing)
says something to you about it being inappropriate and you apologize. Great.
How, though, do you get from, "I didn't realize that was racist," to "but that
thought it so intrinsic to my being that I don't care and I'll say it again
later"? The only method I can see to get there is if "I am an empathetic human
being who cares about others" isn't a part of how you view yourself.

Personally, I am *bad* at empathy. I have a hard time reading people sometimes,
but I still like to think of myself that I'm empathic. If I manage to figure out
that someone was hurt by me, I feel bad. I want to make it better. And in the
scenario laid out above, we're removing that, anyway. Above, I've said something
and someone flat out told me what was going on, in case I didn't pick it up.

So if some aspect of that remark is intrinsic to my self image and empathy is
intrinsic to my self image, then they're in competition now. And, I guess, you
have to be real with yourself about which one is actually more important to you.
Possibly with observation, not introspection. Personally, I'd like my personal
narrative to be more about being empathetic to other people than about
protecting my ego or whatever.

So, I guess what I'm saying is: If someone near you points out that something
you said is out of bounds, and you find yourself saying, "No, my gay friend
always jokes around with me that way and he's not offended," then you are
failing at empathy. At least from the standpoint of someone who is basically
sitting on a mountain of privilege (me), social justice isn't about gay couples
wanting to "ruin marriage" or women wanting to invade and displace all our
special boys club professions and hobbies or whatever: It's about giving a shit
about other human beings.
