---
layout: post
title: "Are You a Good Person?"
date: 2016-11-21 22:45:30 -0600
comments: true
categories: 
---

There's something I've been thinking about for quite some time, now. Something
that's been bugging me. There seems to be a thing I hear chiefly from other
white people, usually straight cis men. The way it's expressed is manifold, but
the underlying theme is a concern with whether one is a good person and that
others recognize one's goodness.

I've seen this very recently a lot from people who voted for and/or support
Donald Trump. When asked to account for his various horrendous personal acts and
history of such acts, they say things like, "Oh I agree he's horrible, but..."
and follow some band-aid excuse. They take personal offense to assertions like,
"It seems to me that race was the biggest determining factor in the election,"
because even if they agree that Trump is a racist, they want to assure me that
*they* are not a racist.


## Racism is Commutative

The problem with this thinking is a failure to understand that racism (and other
oppressions) is catching. If you have a misogynistic friend and you don't call
them on it, you are engaging in misogyny. If you give support, aid, succor or
money to someone who engages in racism, you are supporting their racism. You
cannot divest yourself of the moral burden of that fact by stepping away a
single step (or any number of steps). The racism rubs off on you.

"But wait, Ben," you might say, "Doesn't that means we're _all_ racists? This
country ran on killing indiginous people and the slavery of black people for
basically the first 100 years of its existance!" Here's the thing: You're right.
We're all of us so steeped in it that even if we ignore the historical aspects
we're each personally complicit in some act of racism or another. Denying this
is blindness. If that makes you feel bad about yourself, take some time to
process that emotion and then move past it. We'll circle back to the whole "good
person" thing here in a sec.


## Identities are Bullshit

I am not a feminist. You are not an ally. A book is not sexist. A movie is not
racist. These phrases are simplifications and abstractions that don't really buy
us much, but can lead to lazy thinking. Melissa McEwan has a wonderful
[post on the topic](http://www.shakesville.com/2013/04/on-fixed-state-ally-model-vs-process.html).
What matters is not whether I am an ally, but whether I _do ally work_.

I started thinking this way first about myself and allyship and then about other
things, specifically the media I consume. At first, I got hung up on whether a
work "was feminist" or not. I was trying to ascribe some kind of Social Justice
Scoreâ„¢ to everything. This was constantly thwarted by media that were very
mixed. One episode of a show would have this wonderful pro-woman message and
then the next would trot out a hackneyed misogynistic trope.

I realized (with some external help as basically always) that my thinking about
this phenomenon was all wrong. What matters is not what the show _is_, but what
it _does_. How much feminist work does this show do? How much racist work does
it do? These two answers can exist in parallel and allow for a much more robust
criticism.

So let's get back to the, "He may be a racist, but I'm not," thing. This
importance of action over identity is the mechanism by which racism is
communicable. Donald Trump does racist work. He takes actions that have racist
outcomes. A person's support of him maginfies the effects of his work _including
the racist work_. So supporting him is racist work. This is true regardless of
what is in your heart or what reasoning you have.


## You Must Observe Yourself to Discover Your Priorities

One thing I've long held is that a verbal statement of priority means basically
nothing. You don't set priorities by declaring them, you _enact_ them by _doing
things_. Changing your habitual actions is a lot harder than saying you will
change them and introspecting is a lot more challengeing than even that. But if
you want to be real with yourself (and I think we all should want this), then
it is necessary.

The strategy I've taken to using is that I inspect the actual actions I take in
the world and use that to _find out_ what my priorities are. It's one thing to
say, "School work is a high priority for me," and another to actually set aside
the time to study and do the work. I did not, it turns out, make school work a
high priority when I was in college.


So when you do something that constitues racist work (and let's give you the
benefit of the doubt that it does _other_ work that is beneficial), you are
making a clear, unambiguous statement of priority. You are saying that the
beneficial work done outweighs the racist work done. This is often _fine_.
Because of our society, you can hardly operate in the world without engaging in
some kind of racist work. The key is trying to ensure the benefit outweighs the
harm done.

When it comes to support of Trump and the people he has surrounded himself with,
though, when you say the reason you voted for him is because you're worried the
Democrats would raise taxes that unpacks to saying that your tax concerns are
more important that racism. Your taxes are a higher personal priority than
anti-racism. If that seems like a reasonable position, then I urge you to get
some empathy lessons from somewhere and learn to
[give a shit about other human beings](/2013/04/28/social-justice-is-made-of-empathy/).


## What About that "Good Person" Thing?

So, you make a remark and someone tells you it contained ableist language. You
didn't know! You appologize and tell the person it was an accident. What's going
on here? You're assuring them that even though you messed up, you're a good
person on the inside. But this is treating goodness as an identity. Basically no
one thinks they're a bad person. You don't be a bad person by thinking it and
revelling in your badness. That's some Sekeletor-level bullshit and adults
should have a more nuanced view of the world.

What matters is not whether you're a good person or a bad person. What matters
is if you _do harm_ or _give aid_. If you accidentally use an ableist slur, it
doesn't matter what was in your heart. What matters is that you did ableist
work. The way you go about being a good person is to minimize harm and maximize
help.

This is something you have to decide to do in every moment in every day. You
must seek out opportunities to do good. I don't mean you have to go out of your
way to do good (though that's nice to do on occasion, too). I mean you have to
be on the lookout for the opportunities that are all around you all the time and
take concrete action when it matters. Small oppressions are all around us and if
you leave them unchallenged, they rub off on you. Take the opportunity to combat
them.

It's not who you are _inside_ that matters; no one can see that shit. Only the
effect you have on the world counts.
