---
layout: post
title: "Fiction: Patty"
date: 2017-10-11 20:47:56 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
---

CONTENT WARNING: Vague child abuse references, sad.

Patricia lives on a farm. She has 3 sisters and a mommy and a daddy. They don't
have much money and their farm doesn't make much food, but they all have to work
really hard in the fields. Mommy and Daddy believe in God, so they don't
celebrate Christmas or birthdays or anything else like the other kids. She isn't
allowed to go to other kids' birthday parties, either, which is OK because she
doesn't have many friends. Most days, she doesn't go to school, anyways. Her
daddy is very serious. He doesn't like loud noises or laughing or playing. He
says God likes people who have a Good Work Ethic. Patty isn't really sure what
that means, but it seems like it has to do with digging up rocks in their fields
a lot and not talking at the dinner table.

Patty's favorite person is her Granny. When her Granny comes to visit, she takes
Patty on walks in the woods and when they're far away from the house, she tells
funny stories and makes Patty laugh. Sometimes, Patty is afraid they'll get in
trouble because God only likes quiet, well behaved children, but Patty's Granny
says it's OK. One time, Patty and her Granny were out late at night in the
woods, and Patty got scared of all the night sounds. Patty's Granny taught her
about how to be brave by laughing at scary things and it worked!

When they're at the house and Patty's daddy tells the girls to be quiet, Patty's
Granny looks sad. So one day, Patty's Granny took Patty to the big city, which
is called Atlanta. They talked to a person there who has a job of protecting
kids from bad grownups. Patty's Granny told the person about Patty and her
sisters and how they weren't allowed to laugh and play or have birthday parties
because of God. But the person just said it was Rural Alabama and What Did You
People Have To Laugh About, Anyway, and they sent Patty and her Granny away.

Patty's Granny cried and said she must have been a bad mommy for her son to
become so bad. Patty hugged her Granny and told her she wasn't a bad mommy, even
though Patty didn't know her Granny's son and wasn't sure what that had to do
with God not liking birthdays. That night, Patty's Granny and daddy had a big
fight and she left the next day. Patty's daddy said she wouldn't come to visit
any more because she was too sick.


## Appendix: Authors Notes

This is the first fanfiction I've written. The references are vague enough that
I don't expect most people to spot that it's a version of Pinkie Pie's origin
story from _My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic_. I'm not the biggest fan of
that show by far, but I always admired how Faust created a kids' show where the
realities of the characters' lives were dark as _shit_, but it wasn't really
apparent unless you paid close attention. I didn't really change much except I
set it in our world, inplied Patty and her family are human and add God into the
mix. Most of the main six characters have some kind of abusive, toxic or tragic
thing going on with their parents in the show.

It also sort of doesn't have an ending. It's not a story so much as a writing
exercise, but I thought I'd share it anyway.
