---
layout: post
title: "Dragon Age: Inquisition & Social Justice"
date: 2015-11-03 21:15:00 -0600
---
So, I've been playing Dragon Age: Inquisition. It's not the newest game on the
block and I'd been ignoring it studiously for a long time, but then a friend of
mine wouldn't shut up about it and I finally decided I might as well try it. I
almost fell off the wagon, as it were, but then some stuff happened and I got
hooked. This post is going to be a big rant about social justice and Dragon Age:
Inquisition. There's a ton of spoilers to follow and I'm also not going to
explain all of the context, so if you haven't played the game, you might want to
skip this unless you just love following links to Wikia pages. You've been
warned.

A while ago, I decided that if a video game has a character creation mechanic, I
would create a woman of color. Long before that, I'd decided to always create a
woman and I'd noticed it changed the way I perceived the games I was playing and
the (lack of) diversity in the cast and the way women were portrayed. I wanted
to keep doing that, but also add in improved racial awareness. Therefore, I knew
I was going to play, in this case, a black lady.

Then I had to pick a species (and background, but that's beside the point, just
now) and after a bit of thinking and talking with my friend, I decided to play
as a [Dalish elf](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Dalish). I don't remember
what, exactly, made me decide this, but early on in the game, I decided she
wasn't just Dalish, but she was Super Dalish. She believed _strongly_ in Dalish
culture and the Dalish philosophy. They have a saying: "We are the Dalish:
keepers of the lost lore, walkers of the lonely path. We are the last of the
Elvhenan, and _never again shall we submit_." Emphasis mine.

So as part of her personal identity, she wants to improve the lot of elves
everywhere (not just the Dalish), and try to undo the oppression many of her
people suffer at the hands of humans across
[Thedas](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Thedas). Having decided this, I tried
to get into that mindset when making decisions in the game. Basically: Assume
anything Dalish is right until proven otherwise and distrust humans, but
especially their institutions.

It turns out, this was a really good call on my part because so much of the game
is about all the awful shit the humans (mostly the
[Orlesians](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Orlais)) did to the Dalish elves.
Some of the more gut-punchy examples:

* You have to go to the Orlesian palace at
  [Halamshiral](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Halamshiral) to save the life of
  the empress. Halamshiral is built on the ruins of the capital of the most
  recent elven nation, which was ruined in a war that devastated the elven
  population and was instigated by the nation whose empress you're meant to go
  save.
* You go to a place called
  [the Emerald Graves](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Emerald_Graves). It's a
  beautiful, giant forest. See, the humans call their holy crusades Exalted
  Marches, and they did one against the elves, killing tons of them. There is a
  tree in the Emerald Graves for each elven warrior that fell to the Orlesians.
  It is a _really_ big forest.

In the [Exalted Plains](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Exalted_Plains) (named
after the above-mentioned Exalted March), some humans have taken refuge in an
old elven fort. They are taking refuge from some undead. Which have risen
because the humans are killing each other in such numbers. So they bar the doors
and then, in panic, activate some ancient elven magical defense that they don't
fully understand.

At this point, I was done with humans. I thought, "Just. Stop. Everyone go home.
This war thing is over. You are all _so bad at life_." Meanwhile, 2 river
valleys over, there's a small band of Dalish and I thought, I should just send
all the humans home and give the whole region back to the Dalish (it _was_
originally promised to the elves by
[the human's sort of jesus-analog](http://dragonage.wikia.com/wiki/Andraste),
after all).

And then I realized something of actual importance to the real world. I'd
previously _intellectually_ understood people of color being fed up with white
folks or genderqueer people being fed up with cis folks or, you know, various
people being fed up with people like _me_ by various degrees. Suddenly, though,
I had empathy for people who say, "Kill all men," or, "White people just stop,"
or, "Ban cis people."

Despite all our advantages (which we have gained via oppression, let's be
clear), we are still _terrible_ at shit. The simplest example I can think of is
black people looking at the musical artifacts produced by white people and
seeing shitty, grainy photocopies of stuff they invented previously.

Now, I don't want to say that my getting into the headspace of a fictional elven
lady and learning about the fictional atrocities perpetrated against her people
means I, like, Understand What It Means To Be Black or any shit. I'm saying that
the interactive nature of the story telling in this game managed to communicate
to me at least _some_ amount, some pale shadow, perhaps, of this one aspect of
being a member of some marginalized group interacting with the oppressor group
in a world made by those oppressors. And I hope that this additional empathy can
make me a better person and help me be less oppressive. Maybe it can help
others, too.
