---
layout: post
title: "The Incredibles 3"
date: "2018-07-25 21:12:49 -0500"
---

I've been thinking a lot about _The Incredibles 2_ since I saw it. Now that we
have two entries in the series, we can make some statements about what subjects
the franchise as a whole addresses—at least if we're comfortable extrapolating a
line from two points. _I'm_ comfortable with doing that and so I'd like to talk
about some of those topics and how I'd like to see them developed in a
theoretical third movie: _The Incredibles 3_.


## Content Warning

Expect spoilers for _The Incredibles_ and _The Incredibles 2_ below. Not a ton,
but still.

Also, I'm doing a somewhat feminist reading of the franchise and below I'm going
to lightly touch on racism and situations where men emotionally manipulate
women. I won't go into detail, but if you feel like you don't want to deal with
either of those right now, this is your chance to bail on reading this post. I
mean—you can actually bail any time. I can't stop you from closing the browser
window whenever you want. I'm not your real dad. And he can't stop you either,
probably.


## Two Brief Tangents

Before we get into my thoughts, I wanted to mention some things about _The
Incredibles 2_ that sort of indirectly relate to my reading. Other people
brought them up to me and I feel like they bear mentioning.

First, _The Incredibles 2_ has several extended scenes with lots of flashing
lights. Upon initial release, there wasn't an epilepsy warning before the movie,
which is a bummer. I feel like folks making visual media should be more aware of
that. Heck, most video games have epilepsy warnings at the front and I don't
know that I've ever played a game with as much flashing as this movie. I'm sure
it was an oversight, not malice, but still. In case you're curious, a brief bit
of internet research led me to the understanding that about 1.5 million people
worldwide have the kinds of epilepsy where flashing lights might cause a
seizure.

The second point is about the character Brick. She was the super strong and big
lady who was part of the sort of… second-tier group of supers that Helen
(Elastigirl) is introduced to by the Deavor siblings. Some folks read her as an
unflattering portrayal of how society sees trans women. I can't speak to whether
that was anything like the creators' intent, but I'm not about to tell someone
that that reading or their feelings about it are invalid.

I just wanted, at the outset, to mention those elements because I think it's
important to be critical and acknowledge the shortcomings of the media we
discuss and love.


## The Incredibles & the Role of Masculinity in Society

Boom! You thought this was just some blog post about a cartoon, didn't you? I
mean—it is, but… _ahem_.

So across the first two movies, one common thread is that they interrogate the
role of masculinity in society and societal expectations of men. In the first
film, we see Bob (Mr. Incredible) struggling under the expectation that he be
the "provider" of his family. He feels trapped in a job he hates both in a
tactical, moment-by-moment way _and_ in a strategic, effects-on-the-world way.
Then he goes into full-on mid-life-crisis mode and gets the new job (which he
hides from his wife) and gets the new car, etc. His narrative is basically
exemplary of very traditional male gender roles in America.

In the second film, we see him grapple with the other side of these
expectations. It is his _wife_ who gets the awesome new job and he clearly feels
emasculated by that. He wants to still help his family, so he sort of swaps
spots with her and takes on child rearing duties full time. But he is _awful_ at
it probably because he previously saw it as outside his purview. So he's outside
his comfort zone in how he's relating to his family and he's really bad at this
important task, so it drives a huge amount of stress for him. Which he, again,
hides from his wife.

I think you could do some worthwhile (if not particularly novel) analysis of
these two plot arcs and come away with conclusions about how men fit into
American society today and the damage that that does to many of us. The problem
with that, and the direction I'd like to see this subject developed, is that all
of this is from Bob's perspective. Notice that I could easily give the synopses
above without even using Helen's name. I didn't even need to refer to Violet
directly at all. It's also a solidly white and upper middle class perspective.


## The Plot of _The Incredibles 3_

This movie really centers around Violet and how she relates to the rest of her
family and society. At the outset of the movie, we see that several years have
passed. Violet is now in high school. Maybe she's a sophmore or junior. As with
most people at this age, she's trying to figure out who she is and who her
friends are and who she wants them to be and how to turn into the adult version
of herself.

Specifically, she's struggling with changes to her body, societal beauty
standards and a desire to be seen as attractive by boys she's interested in.
She's also trying to work out independence from her parents, but isn't sure what
that means, if she's ready for it or how to go about actually getting it. So,
you know, she's a teenager.

There are two boys in school important to our narrative. I'll give them names so
we can refer to them, but I haven't done a ton of thinking about them. The first
is Peter. He's a sort of jock type: strong jaw, broad shoulders, confident
demeanor, blond hair, white, wealth cultural signals, everybody loves him. The
second is Khaled. He is considered a bit weird by his peers. He's not socially
awkward, but he's sort of frozen out and has adopted some loner tendencies as a
result. Maybe he wears a lot of black or whatever. Peter seems desireable yet
unattainable to Violet, and Khaled seems like he might be interested in her, but
she doesn't want to spend the social capital to give him the time of day, so
she's casually cruel to him.

Violet is also, you might remember, a super hero. She's going out on her own,
despite her parents' forbidding it. She decides she doesn't like her red,
family-themed costume—she wants something sexier because she's trying to be (and
be seen as) a woman, not a girl. She goes to some designer who is not Edna to
get a new one. Maybe it has a boob window or a super high-cut bikini bottom or
something. It doesn't really matter what, as long as it's ridiculous and plays
into tropes of "sexy" costumes dumped on female super heroes.

Helen, of course, isn't happy with any of this. Maybe she even criticizes
Violet's new costume on feminist grounds, but Violet can throw her mom's past
right back in her face: "Elasti<strong>girl</strong>, mom?!? Way to lean right
into the infantilization!"

While out at night, Violet meets another super. He's strong and confident. His
powers are sort of similar to Mr. Incredible's. She doesn't know it right off,
but it's Peter. They start to work together and bond. They share their
identities with each other and start to hang out in both their super and their
civilian lives.

They come across a shadowy figure doing illegal things. He's breaking into
police evidence rooms and corporate server farms or whatever; stealing things.
It starts to feel like the leg-work portion of a serious super villain plot.
They don't know it, but it's Khaled. I don't know if he has powers or if he's
more of the Syndrome/Batman/Iron Man type with gadgets and such.

As they investigate this mysterious (to them) villain guy, a sexual tension
develops between Violet and Peter. They start to date and Violet is really
pleased with her life. She continues to have arguments with her parents about
how much autonomy she is and should be exercising, but she sees her current
situation as vindication that she is right and they'll never understand her.

Over time, though, Peter starts to get… pushy. Not physically, but he pressures
Violet to do things in both their romantic and heroic relationships that she
isn't comfortable with. She feels pressured to capitulate, though, because of
the role she understands him to play in society and her desire to, well, be
accepted by this popular hot guy. Importantly, he doesn't pressure her to do
anything illegal. He just doesn't respect any boundary setting she tries to do.

As we near the climax of the plot, Violet and Peter confront Khaled (in super
villain form) in an attempt to stop his latest heist. During this confrontation,
they learn his identity, but also that Khaled has been investigating a mystery
of his own. He's been breaking the law, yes, but in pursuit of uncovering some
conspiracy. Since they're all kids, I feel like this shouldn't be, like, a
national or international level conspiracy, but maybe that would be OK. I don't
want to blow the top off the setting, though.

When they surface this revelation Peter doesn't assimilate it well. He has a
pretty absolutist moral model where if you've broken the law, you're a Bad Guy™
and have to be stopped and punished. He also, you know, doesn't value Khaled as
much as his other peers at school, so it's easy for him to over-punish him and
still feel good about himself. Peter tries to manipulate Violet into seeing
things his way and maybe beating the hell out of Khaled.

Violet, for the first time, sees what Peter is doing clearly and rejects it. She
ends the encounter, but nothing is resolved. Khaled is in the wind and she and
Peter are clearly done, but it isn't clear what the next thing is. She feels
lost. Ideally, too, there's some school-related parallel, here. Some deadline or
big event that I just haven't worked out (yet?). In the best tradition of _Buffy
the Vampire Slayer_ and _Veronica Mars_, the "hero" plot should be paralleld by
a "normal adolescent" plot.

Feeling uncertain and not sure where to turn, she goes to visit Edna. Mostly
this is just because I love Edna as a character and I want her to appear at
least a couple times in this plot, but also because I feel like teenagers tend
to listen to advice better from adults who are not their parents.

Anyway, Edna gives Violet advice and validates her creeped-out feelings about
Peter. She also advises Violet on verifying the merit of Khaled's claim about a
conspiracy. Violet does some self-actualization and as a visual parallel, Edna
gives her a new costume (and, it is revealed, had already been designing it for
her, "Because a woman must stand on her own, dahling."). The new costume isn't
the red/black/yellow Incredibles theme, but is it's own thing. It should
reference the family design in a small way so as to symbolize her being her own
person but not entirely separated from her family.

So, in her new costume, Violet goes out and finds Khaled. Khaled shows her his
evidence so far and they team up to get the last bit of evidence they need to
prove and defang the conspiracy. When they get there, of course, Peter also
arrives and they have it out verbally and then physically.

During the fight there's a crucial moment where Khaled suggests to Violet that
she do something she doesn't feel comfortable with; something that Peter had
previously gotten her to do. She declines and he responds with something like,
"Oh. Of course. You're right," and they figure out another way to achieve their
goals. This shows that Khaled respects Violet's boundaries in contrast to
Peter's earlier behavior and provides an alternative, less toxic model for
audiences. Eventually they overcome Peter, despite his strength, get the
evidence and, you know, win the day or whatever.

Importantly, Violet and Khaled do not begin a romantic relationship; just a
friendship and a partnership. There might even be dialog where Violet tells
Khaled that this doesn't mean she'll date him and him to reply something like,
"Oh! Oh, no. I wasn't mooning around after _you!_ Haha. Nonono. I was mooning
after _Peter!_ But I am pretty much extremely over that now."


## Themes

So one major theme is how girls and boys are socialized to think about their
roles as men and women from, well, a girl's point of view. I'd ideally want
audiences younger than Violet to see this movie and become aware of the toxic
behavior pattern Peter exhibits and learn to recognize and avoid people who do
it or not to do it themselves. Never having been an adolescent girl my own self,
if this ever got to a stage to be fleshed out more it would obviously benefit
from a genderally… diverse … poly-gendered…? Genderifically diverse? A writing
team diverse in gender, anyway.

Another theme is Khaled's being a person of color. I didn't call it out
explicitly above because I'd kind of expect it to be conveyed most strongly
visually. Historically, the cast of The Incredibles movies has been
overwhelmingly white. I wouldn't change that here, but rather than let it be an
unexamined by-product of a white-dominated industry, I want to make a point with
it. Part of Khaled's social struggles are because there aren't many people in
his school who look like him. This also contributes to Violet's and Peter's
reading of him as a villain initially (even though they don't know it's Khaled
specifically). I want to undermine (Eh? Eh?) and challenge those initial reactions and
uses of stereotypes. As with the previous theme, a racially diverse writing team
would be important if this were to be further developed.

A third theme is about how anything that seems too good to be true probably is.
I didn't put this in here on my own, but it's a major factor in the plots of the
first two films, so it felt appropriate to have an ally-to-villain reversal like
the first two films and permute it by also having a villain-to-ally reversal.

Lastly, there's the point about what is just and what is legal and how we should
interrogate our system of laws to try to always make them more just. I am 0%
interested in Violet and Khaled at the end of the movie working with the cops or
anything. They should give their evidence to a journalist or something. Peter is
definitely the type to work with the cops. Maybe his dad even _is_ a cop.


## What's Missing

I already alluded to it, but one thing that's missing is any kind of plot arc
that makes school matter. If there's going to be time spent with Peter, Violet
and Khaled not in costume, something has to be going on at school that's
interesting enough to make audiences care about that side of their lives. I
guess it should probably tie into the conspiracy Khaled's uncovered, but I have
literally no ideas on this front.

Also, uh, Dash doesn't appear? Let alone Jack-jack (who by this point would be a
full-on kid and probably just going by "Jack" or "John" or something). In fact
the whole rest of the family is firmly in the background, which is a stark
contrast to the other two films. I think Violet is super interesting, but it
feels like at least a _bit_ of a miss not to work them in somehow. My friend
Matt wondered if the heteronormative and patriarchal "family with children
aspect of the movies" made it hard to work them into a story that's trying to
challenge those aspects of society. And I'm not sure, but that sounds plausible.

Also, uh, you might have noticed that I just sort of stopped talking about Peter
after Violet ditches him and teams up with Khaled. I have no idea what to do
with Peter at the end. I feel like he should get some kind of comeuppance, but I
would _really_ like it if we could at least hint that he's on a path to learning
better and becoming less of a douche. I don't really want to present a narrative
where if someone sees themselves in Peter I end up telling them, "You are like
this awful character and therefore are irrideemable and evil." I think that
discourages people from trying to be better on the one hand and on the other
gives people an excuse to disregard that part of the message.


## Brad Bird, Please Steal This

I know there is only an _infintesimal_ chance that this document would get in
front of Brad Bird's eyes. But if it does, or even if it doesn't and someone at
Pixar has ideas that look in any way similar to the above and it gets made into
a movie (preferrably before 2032), I will be overjoyed and swear I will not sue.
The posts on this blog are implicitly copyrighted by me if my understanding of
US copyright law is correct, but this one Pixar can have. I am willing to sign a
legal document to that effect.

However, I don't see Disney in general and Pixar specifically ever making a film
like this. For one thing, I think they're too conservative and risk-averse.
This story makes some concrete political statements about which there isn't
unified, broad consensus in the general public. They would deal with a major
right-wing, internet-based backlash if they did this.

Also, the themes of gaslighting and emotional manipulation brought up with Peter
and Violet's relationship are often considered "mature" topics. Part of why I
like using The Incredibles to tell this story is, as I said above, to catch kids
before they find themselves at a party in high school dealing with a pushy,
boundary disrespecting dude like Peter. But The Incredibles is a children's
franchise (despite the fact that people who were born the year _The Incredibles_
came out were roughly Violet's age by the time _The Incredibles 2_ came out). I
don't see Pixar ever wanting to let Violet grow up and physically mature enough
to make a ridiculous boob window meaningful. I think they'd aggressively protect
Violet's innocence, as it were.


## _The Incredibles 4_

Also I think _The Incredibles 4_ is about Dash figuring out that he's gay or bi
or something. I don't know. This Violet plotline sprang almost fully formed into
my head and I haven't thought as much about Dash.

_Thanks to Matt Dauman and Joshua Semar for helping edit this post._
