---
layout: post
title: "Linguistics Minute: Saxon & Gnalian Spelling"
date: "2019-01-01 12:00:00 -0500"
---
_This was originally published in my work Slack on 2016-10-03, but I've since
been convinced that more people than just those few who can even read it there
might be interested. I've edited it for clarity and correctness. I'm going to
migrate all my Linguistcs Minutes over to my blog and probably post future ones
here._

It turns out that spelling was basically always fucked in English. When the
Germanic invaders of Britain first started writing, there were basically two
main tribes: The Angles and the Saxons (the Jutes and Frisians had way smaller
populations). They ended up having a few different kingdoms and initially the
most powerful one was the West Saxon kingdom the name of which was eventually
elided to Wessex.

Since the West Saxons were the most powerful, they sort of led the charge in
adopting writing: most of the documents that were produced were West Saxon
governmental documents like decrees and treaties and such. Other kingdoms
learned to spell from them.

The Anglian kingdoms, however, were the more populous so most people learned to
spell based on how the West Saxon dialect was spoken, but spoke an Anglian
dialect themselves. And later, the Anglian kingdoms came to power and modern
English was mostly influenced by the dialects spoken in and around London, which
was technically in Essex (the East Saxon kingdom), but spoke an Anglian dialect
because of the influence of nearby Anglian kindoms.

For instance, think of the words _yea_ and _year_. Today, we pronounce _yea_ to
rhyme with _bay_. Back when it was the primary word for "yes", the West Saxons
pronounced it with a diphthong (saying both vowels, but still in one syllable)
very similar to how we pronounce _yeah_ and the Anglians pronounced it with a
single vowel sound (sort of like "yeh"). Similarly, _year_ had a diphthong in
West Saxon, but a monophthong in Anglian.

So from a linguistic hereditary standpoint, the _year_ that we say, was never
pronounced the way we spell it. The vowel change that altered it from something
like "yehr" to something like "yeer" came later (Hi, Normans. Thanks for
invading in 1066!), but the spelling never really lined up.
