---
layout: post
title: "Mark it Zero, Dude"
date: "2019-01-31 12:00:00 -0500"
category: Linguistics Minute
---
_This was originally published in my work Slack on 2016-11-11, but I've since
been convinced that more people than just those few who can even read it there
might be interested. I've edited it for clarity and correctness. I'm going to
migrate all my Linguistics Minutes over to my blog and probably post future ones
here._

So the word _mark_ means (at least in one of its meanings) "to make an area of
some surface a different color than the surrounding area". As in, "making a mark
on a page." This is a pretty old word in English, but it originally had a
different meaning.

Old English _merc_ or _mearc_ (different dialects) meant "a border or boundary"
and came from the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European _\*merg-_ with the same
meaning.  Because it meant "border", people would use it to refer to the regions
near the edge of a kingdom. When cartography became a thing, then, people would
draw a line to deliniate the mark between two kingdoms. Thence, _mark_ started
to refer to the line drawn to illustrate the border and then broadened to mean
any line or symbol put on a surface. With this in mind, it makes sense that
Denmark is the country where the Danes live.

As a bit of an asside: French (not a Germanic language) inherited a related word
from Frankish (a Germanic language) that ended up as _marcher_ "to march, walk"
and that became modern English's _march_ after the Norman invasion in 1066.

The way this got from "border region" to "to walk" is that border regions of
kingdoms were often mostly rural, so "the marches" started to refer to the
countryside generally. And, of course, wars and fighting are more common on your
borders than your interior, so armies spent a lot of time in the marches. They
verbed the noun so that it meant, "to go be an army and do army things in the
countryside" and marching around from place to place is a thing armies do, well,
a **lot**, so the meaning narrowed to reflect that mode of travel by armies.

A lot of the words English borrowed from French after 1066 are words to do with
war, which is a strong statement about the relationship between the Normans and
the English at that time.


## Appendix A: Tolkien nerddom

In _The Two Towers_, Aragorn asks Éomer for "news from the Riddermark". He's
referring, here, to Rohan (the kingdom Éomer is from). This is a
pseudo-Old-English word that Tolkien constructed because Old English stands in
for the language of the Rohirrim (for **super** nerdy reasons, which I will tell
you if you ask, but be wary, I may not shut up for a long time thereafter). The
word basically means "the borderland of the riders".

It seems like a weird thing to refer to a whole country as a borderland, but
it's because Aragorn is culturally very close to Gondor and originally Rohan was
just a province of Gondor. It was their northern-most border province, in fact.
And after the Horse Lords came to Gondor's aid in some war or other, they were
granted the province to live in as a sovereign nation.

They used this line in the movie without explaining it at all (and the
explanation in the books is cursory) and I bet most people were just like, "Oh.
Another name I don't know. Why does every person and thing have a million names
in this damn story and ʜᴏᴡ ʟᴏɴɢ ʜᴀᴠᴇ ᴛʜᴇʏ ʙᴇᴇɴ ᴡᴀʟᴋɪɴɢ ғᴏʀ?!?!" Which is
reasonable. But… now you know.
