---
layout: post
title: "Starboard & Port"
date: "2019-02-04 13:00:00 -0500"
category: Linguistics Minute
---
_This was originally published in my work Slack on 2016-12-20, but I've since
been convinced that more people than just those few who can even read it there
might be interested. I've edited it for clarity and correctness. I'm going to
migrate all my Linguistics Minutes over to my blog and probably post future ones
here._

The way I have always remembered which is which on a boat is that it used to be
"starboard and **larboard**" and that _larboard_ and _left_ both start with "L".
Here's the story of these three words.

The Angles and Saxons were big seafarers, so they had a lot of words for
boat-related stuff. The Old English word _bord_ meant "the side of the boat".
Linguists disagree about whether this is related to modern _board_ meaning "a
plank of wood" and if so how.

On these boats, they had a really long oar that they'd put in the water to help
direct the boat: sort of a precursor to a rudder. They called this oar a _steor_
(pronounced like "steer" and, yes, related to modern _steer_ meaning "to guide
the course of a vehicle"). Generally, maybe because right handed people are more
common, the steor hung off the right side of the boat. Or the right bord. So the
side of the boat with the rudder oar was called the steorbord and later sound
shifts rendered modern _starboard_.

So when these boats with the big, long steors pulled up to the dock, they had to
do so with the other side facing the dock because otherwise the hull would trap
the steor against the dock and snap it as the sea swelled. So the **other** bord
was called the ladde bord. That word _ladde_ is pronounced like modern _ladder_
with the final -r off, so it had two syllables. It means "loading" and shares a
root with that modern word. So the laddebord was the "loading side (of the
ship)". Because humans are lazy, the medial -dd- eventually sort of vanished and
the word became _laerbord_. That medial -r- appeared because of the influence of
_steorbord_.

But when you're on the high seas in the middle of a storm trying to steer around
rocks or whatever and you're at the front of the boat yelling back to the person
crewing the steor, they can have a hard time differentiating you yelling,
"Laerbord!" from, "Steorbord!" since they share so many sounds. Being a
practical sort who don't like drowning in shipwrecks, sailors began to call the
left-hand side of the ship the port side since, you know, that's the side the
port was on when they parked their boat.

Thus, modern _starboard_ and _port_ and the somewhat archaic _larboard_.
