---
layout: post
title: "Linguistics Minute: Eth and Thorn"
date: "2019-01-1 12:00:00 -0500"
---
_This was originally published in my work Slack on 2019-08-15, but I've since
been convinced that more people than just those few who can even read it there
might be interested. I've edited it for clarity and correctness. I'm going to
migrate all my Linguistcs Minutes over to my blog and probably post future ones
here._

So in English, we have two sounds that we spell "th". The "th" in _think_
(unvoiced like "f" and "t") and the "th" in _these_ (voiced like "v" and "d").
This can be a bit confusing when you run across a new word in print, but most
native speakers have an intuitive grasp over when to use which sound (mostly to
do with nearby vowels) that it works out OK.

But it wasn't always so. Old English—and previous Germanic languages—used two
different letters: eth (voiced) and thorn (unvoiced). Eth looks like Ð, ð and
thorn looks like Þ, þ. So, like, the name _Theobold_ would have been spelled
"Þeobold".

However, printing wasn't invented in England, and when printing came to England,
the English printers were looking at the little letter blocks and were like,
"Shit. There's no 'ð'. WTF do we do?" So they looked at what they had and were
like, "You know what. The 'y' looks sort of… vaguely like a 'ð', so let's just
use that." This is a big stretch, but you know… they didn't have a lot to work
with.

So they started spelling things that we spell with "th" today with a "y". The
upshot of all of this is that it was never pronounced "ye shoppe" and doesn't
mean "you shop"… it was pronounced "the shop" because it was … the shop.
