---
layout: post
title: "Linguistics Minute: Spelling is Weird"
date: "2019-01-30 12:00:00 -0500"
---
_This was originally published in my work Slack on 2016-10-19, but I've since
been convinced that more people than just those few who can even read it there
might be interested. I've edited it for clarity and correctness. I'm going to
migrate all my Linguistcs Minutes over to my blog and probably post future ones
here._

This one's more fun than factual, but ü§∑üèª‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏è.

Look at this collection of characters: "ghoti". Based on your understanding of
English spelling how do you expect that's pronounced?

The "correct" answer (scare quotes because this is a joke) is that it's
pronounced the same as _fish_. It's to illustrate some of the ways that English
spells certain sounds that we don't often think of.

Let's break it down a bit. It's the "gh" as in _enough_ (IPA /f/), the "o" as in
_women_ (IPA /…™/) and the "ti" as in _fiction_ (IPA / É/). First, this just shows
that we don't often think of /f/ as being spelled "gh", [like,
ever](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WA4iX5D9Z64). Nor do we think about / É/
being spelled "ti". It also shows how context-dependent certain things are.

You probably intuit that you can't start an English word with "ng" (IPA /≈ã/).
There are a lot of sounds in English that are only allowed in certain placements
or next to certain other sounds. But our spelling is similar in that certain
letter combinations only signify certain sounds when surrounded by other
letters.

For instance, that "gh" only sounds like /f/ when it follows "ou" (with maybe a
few exceptions?) and that "ti" only sounds like / É/ when followed by "on" or
"al". So in the context presented by "ghoti" it's absurd to assert it would be
pronounced /f…™ É/. But, you know, a lot about English spelling is absurd, so‚Ä¶
