---
layout: post
title: "WTF is White Culture"
date: "2020-08-18 16:19:10 -0500"
---

At [work](http://underarmour.com) the other day, we had another session in a
talk series the company has put together on anti-racism (and sometimes straying
into other anti-oppression work). It's been really good stuff, which defies my
expectations for how Corporate America™ generally handles these topics.

This time, part of the session was Mary-Frances Winters talking about the idea
of "cultural competency" and one of the things she said struck me. It was the
idea that in order to gain strong cultural competency, it was important to
become aware of your own culture and others' so that you could be mindful about
the differences between them and how it might or should affect interactions with
people.

And it linked up with this idea that's been in my head for a while, which I
don't remember where I originally heard it: That whiteness is not a culture.
Which is to say, whiteness is only about power. It doesn't have folk music, or a
traditional cuisine. There is no traditional ceremonial dress or religious
practice. There is not culture of whiteness that isn't actually a culture of
white supremacy.

Since whiteness was forged out of a common European identity (which, go research
some about why the idea of "Europe" is, itself, racist), it also means that the
distinct cultural markers and practices necessarily had to be filed off to erase
the differences. This might sound like "the melting pot" that the US often
boasts of, and I think it is related. But I also think it is violence. Like many
of the evils that whiteness has inflicted on those excluded from it, there is a
mirror version that it has inflicted on those included.

In particular within the US (which is the only place I've lived and really
experienced whiteness, so the only place I'm really qualified to address), I
think the twin projects of the eradication and oppression of the indigenous
people, and the kidnapping and enslavement of Black people were important
factors that are pretty specific to the US context. And I think the erasure of
the cultures from which whiteness was made was key in white people justifying
these two atrocities to themselves.

One example of how this is mirrored as violence against those excluded from
whiteness is the way that many Black people in the US were severed from their
historical cultures via the slave trade. These people lost their names and
languages and were forced with literal violence to abandon the cultures of their
peoples. There are, of course, numerous other examples in addition.

This particular case led me to reflect on the fact that when white people say
things like, "I am 50% French, 25% German and 25% English," Black people will
often sort of eye roll and say, "The white people are at it again." Because this
is a particular thing that many of them can never really know about themselves.
Certainly not simply by asking their grandparents about it or whatever. The
knowledge is lost—was taken from them by white people.

But what drives us to discuss this pedigree sort of information amongst
ourselves? Why does this constitute an interesting conversation topic? I think
it may be an unconscious reaction to the fact that whiteness isn't, actually, a
culture. The fact that people can and do talk about these percentages of
parentage generally indicates a few generations of separation from the named
cultures. And I think those of us who are so removed from that list… the only
connection we really have to those cultures is the names and those percentages.

What does it mean that I'm half Irish and half German? I have no idea. I don't
really know what it means to be Irish or German. I was not really raised in a
household where those were very meaningful and I think it is very typical for
white kids' families (at least of my age) for it to have even less of an impact
on their home experience than mine.

In order for white people to cease the damage we do and undo the damage we have
done to other people's cultures (and to people sort of… _through_ their
culture or with respect to their culture) we will have to rediscover for
ourselves what it means to have a culture.

I suspect that this does not mean looking backwards. This doesn't mean
reconnecting with your (perceived) Nordic heritage as an excuse for racism and
ideas of Nordic racial purity (there are _no Nazis in Valhalla_, damnit), but it
also doesn't mean putting your Scottish heritage on a pedestal by going to a
weekend festival from time to time with bagpipes and caber tossing. We're so
ill-practiced at having and participating in a culture that we try to paper over
the wound with these sort of shallow attempts.

I don't actually know how to start. I think it will require making a new thing.
And I don't think that it can happen at the scale of the entire US. Somehow we
have to build new cultures, smaller than the US, not centered around consumption
(fandom and hobby things are their own whole topic). I think, just like so much
of white people approaching anti-racism work, it probably begins by talking with
and listening to people who _are_ still connected to their culture—not in order
to plunder their cultural practices, but in order to see how they relate to
those practices. I think it also will involve learning about how to form and
participate in a community, but that, too, is it's own whole topic.
