---
layout: post
title: "2019 Reading in Review"
date: "2020-01-06 09:30:00 -0600"
---

I used to review books on [a dedicated Mastodon
account](https://wandering.shop/@benhamill), but I've since wanted to be able to
show them to people outside the context of the fediverse. This was also spurred
by the fact that, after moving, I read a ton of books without keeping up with
the reviews, so I'd intended to do bunch of catch-up reviews… and that was in
October 2018.

So what's _actually_ transpired is that I've kept a one-line entry for every
book I've read including the title, author and finish date except for the stuff
I read right at the end of 2018 and the start of 2019. So I'm going to share
that list here and maybe talk about some of them a bit and see how I feel.

Also, I want to point out that this list doesn't include comics, which I mostly
read in trade paperback form, or stuff I read with my kids, which is mostly very
short but has begun to include some chapter books. Many of those things have
been lovely and totally worth recommending or talking about, but I figure I have
to limit scope somehow and I didn't happen to think to put those into my
journal.


## The Numbers

Let's do some stats, shall we? Obviously I have to exclude some stuff from the
duration stats on the basis of not knowing when I read it.

**Number of Things Read:** 47

**Reading Time** (in days including weekends, during which I generally don't
read):
* Maximum: 21 days (_Jacobin 33_ and _The Prey of Gods_)
* [Median](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Median): 8 days (_A Conjuring of Light_
  and _Jacobin 34_)
* Minimum: less than a day (_Artificial Condition_, _Exit Strategy_, _Capitalism & the
  State_)
* [Mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mode_(statistics)): 13 days (_Washington
  Black_, _The Body Keeps the Score_, _Broken Stars_ and _The City of Brass_)


## Things I Read in 2019

### _After On_ by Rob Reid (???)

I remember liking this book for the most part and a lot of the ideas were quite
interesting, but it had a fondness and adulation for Silicon Valley start-up
culture that I really couldn't stand and the resolution to the main conflict
boiled down to what a lot of authoritarian fiction (like super hero stories)
does: A small number of smart/good/brave/powerful/special individuals should
stand between everyone else and the problem. Bleh.


### _Temper_ by Nicky Drayden (???)

Drayden is a local author, which I like. The book is her first, as far as I
know, and it sort of shows. But it has some neat ideas and, being fantasy set in
modern Africa, had some angles and features not often seen in the genre.


### _Akata Warrior_ by Nnedi Okorafor (???)

Okorafor is an author I like to return to. Her _Binti_ series is delightful.
The _Akata_ stuff is, like _Temper_, fantasy set in modern Africa, but a
different region and culture (Igboland). I love the way she writes, especially
around themes of finding your identity and making a place for yourself when you
aren't sure how you fit into the society around you. Which this book has plenty
of. It's also an exciting adventure.


### _Parable of the Sower_ and _Parable of the Talents_ by Octavia Butler (???)

I read these back-to-back (and in the wrong order without realizing it, so read
these in the other order, I think). They were incredibly good and incredibly
hard, emotionally. They should be required reading for, uh, humans living in the
US, I guess? Possibly other places? Especially for white folks (or people with
other kinds of priviledge), it's important to understand that the horrible
events depicted in these books are extrapolations from things that are _already
happenning in this country_ to populations that mostly lack privilege.


### _Ridley Walker_ by Russel Hoban (???)

I'd read this in, I think, Jr. High. So this constitutes one of, like, 10 books
that I've read more than once. I reread it because I recalled that by dad has
said it blew his mind when he'd originally read it. I found it… fine.  The story
isn't that interesting and it's not clear to me what the author was trying to
say or what themes were really under discussion. After I'd reread it, I asked my
dad what had been so interesting about it and to him it was the language it was
written in. It's written in what Hoban imagined English might become if society
fell and education evaporated and such. It's hard to understand at first, but
you get it pretty quickly. However, now that I know a fair amount about language
change… this was really bothersome to me because the language change is more
like if someone were very drunk than how language actually changes. Ah well.


### _The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet_ by Becky Chambers (???)

The best way I can talk about this book is to say that it is everything that
fans of _Firefly_ think _Firefly_ is (where it is actually not very those
things). It is about found families and acceptance and healing and it takes
place on a spaceship that is also a home. It's so lovely.


### _Jacobin 31: Breaking Bank_ (???)

This is a quarterly socialist magazine. I have a note that this volume was about
economics. Skimming through the table of contents just now, none of the pieces
jump out at me as being amazing, but I do recall that it helped me understand
what "the neoliberalization of economies" means and how it negatively impacts
working people.


### _Apocalypse Nyx_ by Kameron Hurley (2019-02-06)

I've read all the novels in the _Bel Dame Apocrypha_ and liked them. They're all
a buggy, gross, magical, self-destructive scifi mess in the best way. This book
is a collection of short stories in that continuity that doesn't dissapoint. I
think they were largely published only digitally originally, which is why I'd
missed them. I tend to prefer dead tree reading, so it was nice for them to be
collected such.


### _Washington Black_ by Esi Edugyan (2019-02-19)

My wife bought this for me after hearing a review of it on, I think, NPR. My
impression is that she thought it would be more science fiction than it was.  It
ended up not being much at all, but I still enjoyed it all the way up until the
end. I just incredibly did not understand what the author was trying to do or
say with the ending.


### _The ABCs of Capitalism_ by Vivek Chibber (2019-02-21)

This is actually three pamphlets published by Jacobin: _A: Understanding
Capitalism_, _B: Capitalism & the State_ and _C: Capitalism & Class Struggle_.
I've since loaned these out to a few people and I wish more folks would read
them. The _B_ volume in particular does a great job drawing a connection from
capitalism on a fundemental structural level to injustice and explaining why the
one increasingly causes the other over time. I think they also do a good job of
making the point that there is only so far we can get to achieve justice for all
without overthrowing capitalism and, thus, the limits we're generally under if
we constrain our efforts to electoral politics.


### _Star Wars: Last Shot_ by Daniel José Older (2019-03-04)

I think this is a story about Lando and Han? There's a non-binary character in
it who was pretty cool, I think? And maybe it hopped between eras of, like,
older Han and Lando, younger Han after getting _The Falcon_ and younger Lando
before even meeting Han. Which would imply L3 is in it, but… TBH, I don't
remember this book very well.


### _Catalyst Vol. 2 No. 3_ (2019-03-14)

This is a quarterly, semi-academic journal published by the Jacobin (and edited
by Chibber, above). It includes two pieces I liked a lot: [_Socialism for
Realists_ by Sam
Gindin](https://catalyst-journal.com/vol2/no3/socialism-for-realists) and [_The
Strike as the Ultimate Structure Test_ by Jane
McAlevey](https://catalyst-journal.com/vol2/no3/the-strike-as-the-ultimate-structure-test).
Both were really informative and gave me a lot to think about.


### _A Darker Shade of Magic_ by V.E. Schwab (2019-03-21)

The first in a trilogy (the others appear below) that I quite enjoyed. It's dark
without being needlessly grim. The depiction of magic is interesting. The
characters are likeable when they should be and believably flawed. I was pleased
with the whole run.


### _Leia: Princess of Alerderaan_ by Claudia Gray (2019-03-27)

Gray writes really amazing Star Wars books, y'all. And she really seems to _get_
Leia as a character. This book shows us Leia before her heavy involement in the
Alliance to Restore the Republic and what it means to grow up as the princess of
Alderaan. So good.


### _Jacobin 32: A True Story of the Future_ (2019-03-30)

This one's got a cover that makes it seem like it's just Bernie Sanders fanfic,
which is frustrating. I went in with low expectations, but was pleasantly
surprised. It has pieces discussing the possible for left progress within the
constraints of electoral politics and also what some of those limits are. I do
think this issue in particular reflected Jacobin's general emphasis on electoral
politics over other avenues of change. Personally, I think we have to consider
electoral politics as one tool among many, not the sole or even primary arena of
action.


### _Artificial Condition_, _Rogue Protocol_ & _Exit Strategy_ by Martha Wells (2019-03-30, 2019-03-31, 2019-03-31)

These are all novellas in Wells's _The Murderbot Diaries_ series and follow the
initial novella, _All Systems Red_. Murderbot is delightful and I love the way
Wells writes them. I hear there's a novel out or out soon or something and I'm
looking forward to it. These are books about defining who you are for yourself, the
drive to protect yourself based on past traumas, letting people past those
defenses and, like much scifi that addresses AI and robots, what it means to be
a person who is not human.


### _Kindred_ by Octavia Butler (2019-04-05)

This book was brutal to read (a theme in Butler's work, I guess). It's about a
Black woman living in the 70's who is married to a white man and spontaneously
develops to "ability" to travel back in time to the antebellum US South. It's
not really an ability, though, because she can't control it. I don't want to say
much more because I don't want to have spoilers in this post. I really liked the
book, but it definitely took emotional effort to read.


### _A Gathering of Shadows_ by V.E. Schwab (2019-04-12)

See above about _A Darker Shade of Magic_.


### _The 8-Hour Sleep Paradox_ by Dr. Mark Burhenne (2019-04-16)

A friend lent this to me more than a year before I actually read it after I
complained about sleep. I learned that the idea of "a healthy 8 hours of sleep"
is sort of a broken myth. If you don't sleep _well_ it doesn't matter a ton if
you get 6 or 8 or 12 hours of sleep so much and if you _are_ sleeping well, 8
might be more than you need. There was a bunch of information about apnea and
other sleeping difficulties. Add it to the long list of stuff I should be doing
as an adult that I don't because of all the other things I should be doing as an
adult (read: in our society we work too much to actually take care of all our
responsibilities).


### _The Will to Battle_ by Ada Palmer (2019-04-30)

This is book three in a series (start with _Too Like the Lightning_). I really
love this series, but I understand why it's not for everyone. In particular, the
society depicted has some _fucked up_ ideas about gender and related topics. I
find them to be an interesting way to hold a mirror up to the ways in which our
society's ideas about gender are differently fucked up, but I think it's
entirely reasonable for it to be too uncomfortable for others to read. I feel
like the world building is very skillfully done in that theirs is a world so
different from ours that it is surprising how things work, but the book does a
good job of making sure you know what you need to know about how things work
before they become plot-critical. Also each book begins with an in-universe
content warning, which is pretty rad.


### _A Conjuring of Light_ by V.E. Schwab (2019-05-08)

See above about _A Darker Shade of Magic_.


### _Storm of Locusts_ by Rebecca Roanhorse (2019-05-23)

I found this book in my efforts to read more books by people who are not white
men. It is a post-apocalytic novel by a Native American woman about a Native
American woman. She's writing about a tribe other than her own, but to my
outsider's eyes it seems to be written with care and kindness nonetheless. I
like the main characrter and the mythology it draws on is new to me, so that
novelty is nice to see. Some of the characters, including the love interest, are
kinda meh, but I'll probably read the next book she writes.


### _Jacobin 33: Home Improvement_ (2019-06-13)

This whole issue is about housing. It helped me form opinions about public
housing and understand the awful effects that having
having-access-to-a-place-to-live be subject to the market has. It also had some
great historical context about housing costs, housing justice movements and that
sort of thing.


### _The Body Keeps the Score_ by Dr. Bessel van der Kolk (2019-06-26)

This is a book about the long term physiological effect that traumatic events
have on the human body. It was _very_ interesting and had a lot of information I
hadn't been exposed to before. It made me think about my own life and my own
reactions to certain things and whether I'm in as much control of those
reactions as we all like to tell ourselves. After reading it, I had a
conversation online with someone that pointed out that the author's tone was
pretty othering towards people who live with, say, PTSD, which I think is a vlid
criticism.


### _The Wolf Road_ by Beth Lewis (2019-07-03)

TBH, every time I see this book's title I confuse it with _The Power_ for a
moment, realize that's not right and it takes me a bit to remember what it is.
I liked the story fine while I was reading it, but five months on, it doesn't
stand out in particular.


### _How to Make White People Laugh_ by Negin Farsad (2019-07-09)

This book is amusing and has some great perspective about growing up in an
immigrant (to the US) family. It has some uncomfortable (and, thus, good-to-hear
as a white person) things to say about race. It also has some vaguely
anti-semitic sections (in the form of stereotypes about Jewish folks) that were
uncomfortable in a different way.


### _The Power_ by Naomi Alderman (2019-07-18)

This book gets compared to _The Handmaid's Tale_ often because it has a similar
framing device of academics dicsussing the historical events depicted in the
book from the distant future. However, I feel like the framing device in _The
Power_ is much more integrated into the story in a thematic sense.  Also, other
than the framing device, the books have little else in common other than being,
like, feminist fiction, I guess? _The Power_ is fun and interesting and
challenging. My favorite bit is that there's a casual take-down of evolutionary
psychology that just sort of drifts past and is _devestating_.


### _Catalyst Vol. 3 No. 1_ (2019-07-30)

I _think_ I read the fourth issue of volume 2, but I can't find my paper copy
and it's not in my list, so who knows. This issue had [an interesting interview
with Noam
Chomsky](https://catalyst-journal.com/vol3/no1/there-are-reasons-for-optimism),
but I don't remember any of the other pieces in particular.


### _Lost Stars_ by Claudia Gray (2019-08-04)

Another Star Wars book by Gray. This one doesn't have Leia, but it _does_ have
this wonderful star-crossed friendship-into-romance plotline and really
humanizes (some) Imperials. Like… it shows what sorts of values and priorities
which are not, on their face, evil might lead someone to still join and remain
loyal to the Galactic Empire even in the face of their obvious evils. Given that
most people come to Star Wars books to see the characters from the movies doing
stuff, I think it was bold to choose to focus on original characters almost
exclusively and I think it super worked.


### _The Raven Tower_ by Ann Leckie (2019-08-08)

I loved Leckie's _Ancillary_ series of scifi books and this is her first foray
into fantasy. She blew me away. It is one of those rare books that makes being
in the second person work. Her take on gods and magic in that world was utterly
new to me, which is great. The characters were interesting and I constantly
couldn't wait to see how things would develop next. Like the _Ancillary_ series,
I sort of expect people to talk about the gender stuff going on in this book
more than the rest of it. And _also_ just like the _Ancillary_ serires, that'll
be a pity if true. While the gender stuff is cool and interesting, there's so
much more about this book that makes it great.


### _Broken Stars_ edited by Ken Liu (2019-08-21)

Liu translated the first and third volume of the _Rememberance of Earth's Past_
series (the first book of which is _The Three Body Problem_). He has a passion
for Chinese science fiction and so has edited several collections thereof. And
this is one of those. It has a _lot_ of very weird stories in it, which is
great. Some of them didn't really work for me in a way that I think has more to
do with cultural differences more than the quality of the writing.  Regardless,
I think it's valuable to look outside the boundary of English from time to time
to expose yourself to things you otherwise wouldn't.


### _The City of Brass_ by S.A. Chakraborty (2019-09-03)

This is fantasy set in an Arabia-inspired past. I don't remember if there are
any real-world locations off the top of my head, but there are definitely plenty
of fantastical ones. It's got a cool take on myths about Djinn and associated
beings and the sense of the history of the hidden magical world they inhabit
with political forces and past wars and such was great. The main character sort
of runs face-first into political waters deeper than she's prepared for and it's
good fun.


### _Jacobin 43: War is a Racket_ (2019-09-11)

This issue is about the military industrial complex, the role the military plays
in systemic racism and classism and the lasting negative effects that being a
soldier has on many. It also has a piece on the GI Bill and related soldiers'
benefits and how they show how wider social programs might work and a piece on
armed leftist resistance that's going on in Rojava. In general, I feel like it
covered a pretty broad range of topics; specifically ones I don't have a lot of
personal experience with.


### _A Closed and Common Orbit_ by Becky Chambers (2019-09-16)

Set in the same universe as _The Long Way_ but with only slight narrative ties,
this book is again full of heart and love. It's about discovering and deciding
who you are and who you want to be. It talks about the pain of having to hide
who you are from those around you. It talks about the ethics and quandires of
self-modification. All the people feel real and relatable and the cultures
readers are introduced to are interesting and treated with respect.  Chambers
has quickly become one of my favorites.


### _Acceleratre_ by Nicole Forsgren et. al. (2019-08-22)

This is a "business book", I guess. It's about what things in common
organizations that are good at meeting their goals with software have. I say it
that way because they tried to be broader than just, like, "make a profit",
though that's a goal most organizations that make software have. They talk about
4 key metris to track and establish that if these are all going up, you're going
to meet your goals. This is all backed by scientific research.  They were
surprised to find that many things software professionals often consider of high
importance are not actually related to meeting organizational goals. I think the
identification of these four metrics is great and awful at once. Great because
they are easy to understand and compare to yourself over time. However, I've
heard others that read the book over-focus on them and miss that in order to
make those numbers go up, it probably takes real organizational change—it's not
something that an engineering organization alone can fix by just doing
engineering harder.


### _Native Tongue_ by Suzette Haden Elgin (2019-10-04)

This is feminist scifi about linguistics, so… I loved it? Honestly, the
characters could have been more whole and in many ways it shows it's age (it was
published in 1984) in things like the dialog. There's a constructed language in
the book that Elgin separately published and it has some ideas about encoding
certain things into the language grammatically that I quite like. I keep meaning
to look more into it. There's also apparently another two books in the series,
but I'm not sure if I'll pick them up or not.


### _The Bone Season_ by Samantha Shannon (2019-10-15)

I picked this up because I was at The Book People and saw a staff pick that if
you liked whatever book I was reading at that time and really enjoying, you
might like _The Priory of the Orange Tree_ also by Shannon. But _The Priory_ was
hardback only, enormously thick and fairly expensive, so I decided to pick up
something else by the same author. And I quite liked it. It's got a neat magic
system and a relatable main character. I plan to pick up the other two in the
trilogy and then circle back for _The Priory_, for sure.


### _The Tiger's Daughter_ by K. Arsenault Rivera (2019-11-08)

This is epic, martial arts fantasy about two women in love from an early age.
It's told mostly as a series of letters from one to the other recounting events
they were both largely present for, but just kind of… in order to recount them
to her. It makes more sense than that makes it sound. I just really love these
women and their relationship and how epic they are. This is the third, though,
fantasy book with a lesbian romance in it where one of the women has a reading
problem (she has some kind of dyslexia that only affects the character-based
writing system of one of their culture's), which is an odd, to me, trend. I
don't know what about the modern lesbian experience that might be an allegory
for or what. Anyway, I'm definitely going to read more from this author.


### _Catalyst Vol. 3 No. 2_ (2019-11-22)

I think this whole issue is behind a paywall, but I'm going to link to things in
the hopes that it's a timed paywall and that eventually these links will be
useful. This issue has [_A Socialist Party in Our Time?_ by Jared Abbott and
Dustin
Guastella](https://catalyst-journal.com/vol3/no2/a-socialist-party-in-our-time),
which is about the party politics of the Democratic Party and the forces acting
on socialist or other left candidates.  I have thought a lot about it since
reading it. Also included is [_The Mass Politics of Antislavery_ by Matt
Karp](https://catalyst-journal.com/vol3/no2/the-mass-politics-of-antislavery)
about the abolition movement in the US North before our Civil War and how it
formed and operated, and what problems it had, etc.


### _The Prey of Gods_ by Nicky Drayden (2019-12-13)

Drayden's second book, this one's also set in Africa (specifically South
Africa). It takes place in a future where miniature personal robots have more or
less taken over the role that smartphones have in today's society. And then some
ancient magical/god stuff happens. It was a fun read, but not super deep.  Which
I don't mean to be damning. I hear her third book is out and on the strength of
this and _Temper_ plan on picking it up.


### _Velocity Weapon_ by Megan E. O'Keefe (2019-12-29)

I think I picked this up because someone told me it reminded them of the
_Ancillary_ series. It has some similarities for sure (one of the characters is
a ship-board AI), but I don't think that's a super strong comparison. I did,
however, enjoy it. There's hints of a larger something going on that I believe
may become a statement about coroporations or capitalism or something, but this
first book is about politics in a specific star system and keeping secrets and
manipulating people. One of the main characters is this military lady and she's
real fun to have as a point-of-view character. I believe this is the start of a
series and I entirely intend to read more.


### _Pinko No. 1_ (2020-01-03)

If you're paying attention, you'll notice that I actually finished this one in
2020, but I read most of it in 2019 and also I just wanna talk about it some.
[Pinko](https://pinko.online/) is a zine about gay communism. I really liked it.
In particular, it had a piece about how the phrase "gay communism" does meant
"communism in which gay sex/people is/are
present/omnipresent/celebrated/centered" but something wider. I'm still trying
to wrap my head around it, but it definitely makes the idea of "fully automated
luxury gay space communism in this life" (FALGSCITL; pronounced like "flag
skittle" with the first L and A swapped) much more appealing to me.

_Thanks to Alex and Bradford for helping edit this post._
